Percy Jackson & the Olympians is a series of fantasy novels written by American author Rick Riordan. The first book series in his Camp Half-Blood Chronicles, the novels are set in a world with the Greek gods in the 21st century. The series follows the protagonist Percy Jackson, a young demigod, who must prevent the Titans, led by Kronos, from destroying the world.

The first three books were published in the United States by Miramax Books before it was folded into Hyperion Books; that house published the following three books. All the books were published in the United Kingdom by Penguin Books. Four supplementary books, along with graphic novel versions of the first five books, have also been released. By January 2022 the books had sold more than 180 million copies worldwide, making the series one of the best-selling of all time.[1] Two sequel series, The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo, follow. A follow up trilogy in the series, beginning with The Chalice of the Gods, takes place after the events of The Heroes of Olympus and began in 2023.

The first book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010). It was commercially successful, but received mixed reviews from critics and the audience for its departure from the book. The first book was also adapted into a musical. The second book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters (2013), which also received mixed reviews. A TV series based on the novels premiered on Disney+ in 2023 to positive reviews.

Origins

Riordan at the Texas Book Festival in November 2007, doing publicity for Book 4
Rick Riordan has said that development of these novels began when he was telling bedtime stories to his son Haley Riordan. Haley had been diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia.[2] Haley had been studying Greek mythology in second grade and asked his father to tell him stories based on Greek myths. When Riordan ran out of myths, `his son suggested that he make up new stories based on the gods.`

Riordan created the fictional character of Percy Jackson and a story about his traveling across the United States to recover Zeus's lightning bolt. Haley suggested his dad should make it a book, and Riordan wrote what became known as The Lightning Thief over the next year.[3]

After submitting his manuscript to his agent and editor, Riordan presented the book to a group of sixth, seventh, and eighth graders for their reactions. He gained their approval and, with their help, came up with the book title and the way Percy's sword works.[4] In 2004, the book was sold to Miramax Books for enough money that Riordan could quit his job and focus on writing full time.[5] After it was published in 2005, it sold more than 1.2 million copies. The book was released in multiple editions, including hardcover, paperback and audio editions.[6][7] It has been translated into multiple languages and published internationally.[8]

Plot
The tale is set in the mid-2000s and features Perseus "Percy" Jackson. He is a 12-year-old boy who learns that he is the son of the Greek god Poseidon. Because Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades had sworn not to father any more children after World War II, Poseidon didn't interact with him as a child. The gods took that pledge because their children were too strong and had the potential to cause immense slaughter (in the universe's continuity, World War II was a conflict among their offspring). When Percy learns that he is at risk for being found by ferocious monsters because of his demigod status and strength he also learns that Camp Half-Blood, a training facility on Long Island, New York, houses more demigods like him.

He journeys with new friend Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena, and best friend and traveling companion, Grover Underwood, a satyr who is his guardian. As the threat posed by the Titans grows, Percy begins to complete remarkable tasks, fulfill predictions, and engage in combat with and for the gods. He realizes that he can either contribute to the world's destruction or its preservation.

Books
The Lightning Thief
Main article: The Lightning Thief
The Lightning Thief is the first book in the series and was released on June 28, 2005.

When Percy Jackson comes home for summer vacation, he and his mother, Sally Jackson, travel to their cabin in Montauk to escape Percy's stepdad, Gabe Ugliano. However, the trip is cut short after a series of harrowing incidents, including an attack by the Minotaur, resulting in his mother's disappearance. Percy finds himself at Camp Half-Blood, a training camp for demigods, and discovers that he too is a demigod, son of Poseidon, the Greek god of the sea. Percy also learns that his best friend, Grover Underwood, is actually a satyr (a forest spirit with horns, a human torso, and a goat's lower body), and that Zeus suspects Percy has stolen his Master Bolt, the most powerful weapon in the universe. To clear his name, save the world from another war between the Olympian gods, and possibly save his mother whose soul was collected by Hades, Percy sets out to retrieve the lightning bolt from Hades, who may be the real thief, after hearing a prophecy from an Oracle of Delphi at Camp Half-Blood. Percy, Grover, and Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena, start on a journey to the underworld, facing numerous mythological monsters on the way. Their underworld visit does not go as planned, and they realise that Hades himself had his helmet of darkness (symbol of his power) stolen. After confronting an innocent Hades, they learn that their friend Luke Castellan, son of Hermes, is the real thief who stole the lightning bolt to allow Kronos, the defeated King of the Titans from the past, a chance to rise again and that Ares, the Greek god of war, had been manipulated by Kronos and helped cover up Luke's crime to instigate a war between Olympians. Percy barely holds off Ares in a head-to-head fight which was interrupted by Kronos, who wants Percy alive for his future plans. The confrontation with Luke Castellan happens at Camp Half Blood, which Percy barely survives and Luke flees. At summer's end, Percy returns home to find his mother back from Hades' realm as an expression of gratitude.

The book was adapted into a film by 20th Century Fox under the title Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010), which was directed by Chris Columbus. Riordan did not endorse the film.[9]

The Sea of Monsters
Main article: The Sea of Monsters
The Sea of Monsters is the second novel in the series and was released on April 1, 2006.

Camp Half-Blood is under attack when Thalia's tree, which guards the borders of the camp against monsters, is poisoned and slowly begins to die. The camp activities director has been replaced. To save the tree and the camp, someone must recover the Golden Fleece, which is located somewhere in the Sea of Monsters (the Bermuda Triangle). At the same time, Percy learns that Grover, who has left on a quest to find Pan, has been captured by the Cyclops Polyphemus, and that the Fleece is on the Cyclops's island. Percy sets out to rescue Grover with Annabeth and his Cyclops half-brother Tyson, even though Tantalus, who had replaced Chiron as the camp's activities director, has prohibited him from doing so. Meanwhile, Ares' daughter Clarisse La Rue is sent on an official quest by Camp Half-Blood to retrieve the Fleece. The trip to the Sea of Monsters is long and hazardous, and along the way, the heroes encounter several dangers including Scylla and Charybdis, the sorceress Circe, the Sirens, and their former friend Luke Castellan. Percy also learns of a prophecy from the Oracle of Delphi: A child of one of "the Big Three" most important gods (Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades) will play a vital part in the success or failure of resurrecting Kronos the Titan-King and saving Olympus. Following the encounter with Luke, the heroes eventually retrieve the Fleece and restore Thalia's tree, unknowingly resurrecting Thalia, daughter of Zeus. She had been turned into the tree by her father after she sacrificed herself so Annabeth and Luke could get safely to Camp Half-Blood six years prior.

The book was adapted into a film by 20th Century Fox under the title Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters (2013), which was directed by Thor Freudenthal. Riordan did not approve of the film's screenplay, which differed from the book's plot.[9]

The Titan's Curse
Main article: The Titan's Curse
The Titan's Curse is the third novel in the series and was released on May 1, 2007.

On a mission to rescue the half-bloods Bianca and Nico di Angelo; Percy, Annabeth, Thalia and Grover are attacked by a Manticore. They are rescued by the goddess Artemis but Annabeth is captured. Later, Artemis is captured by Luke's army while hunting for the Ophiotaurus, a cow-serpent. A prophecy said that it would cause the downfall of Olympus when its entrails were sacrificed. Artemis's lieutenant Zoë Nightshade, daughter of Atlas and a sister of the Hesperides, leads Bianca (now a hunter), Thalia, and Grover on a quest to save her. Percy follows them on behalf of Nico di Angelo, promising that he will try to protect Nico's sister Bianca, as he also tries to find Annabeth. The others eventually encounter Percy and he joins their group.

The group are chased across the country. Bianca kills one, leaving the others mystified. As they make their way across a godly junkyard, Bianca sets off a trap. She later dies sacrificing herself to save the others; Percy could not save her. They find Annabeth with Luke and Artemis, who is holding up the sky. Percy then takes it from Artemis and they trick Atlas into his original position under the sky. Thalia replaces Zoë, who dies saving Artemis and, as Artemis' lieutenant. Thalia's induction as a lieutenant of Artemis ensures that she will become immortal, never aging to reach 16, thus escaping the Great Prophecy and leaving Percy to fulfill it. They return to camp and Percy informs Nico about Bianca's death during the journey. Nico blames Percy for failing to protect her and runs away, only after causing skeletal warriors invading the camp to fall into the dark void of the Underworld, thus alerting Percy to the fact that Hades is Nico and Bianca's father.

The Battle of the Labyrinth
Main article: The Battle of the Labyrinth
The Battle of the Labyrinth, the fourth installment in the series, was released on May 6, 2008.

Percy, Annabeth, Grover, and Tyson venture on a quest to find Daedalus's workshop within the labyrinth, which Luke Castellan and his army are looking for too, with the help of Ariadne's string. A swordsman named Quintus is subbing for Mr. D as Camp Half-Blood's director, since Mr. D is on a mission to get the minor gods to be on the gods' side of the war. The questers go on a journey inside the labyrinth, facing many monsters. They eventually discover a forge belonging to the god Hephaestus being used by Kronos's smiths. To escape, Percy triggers a volcanic eruption that puts him in a coma.

Percy awakes on the island Ogygia, being tended by the immortal Calypso. He eventually returns to his friends and recruits Rachel Elizabeth Dare, a mortal he encountered in the previous book, to navigate the labyrinth. With Rachel's help, the group finds Daedalus's workshop, where they find out that Quintus is Daedalus. Daedalus betrays them and sells them out to Luke, and the questers flee back to camp. Luke's army follows them and a battle ensues. The demigods win but suffer many casualties including Daedalus, Castor, and Lee Fletcher. After the battle, they prepare for the oncoming war against Lord Kronos, who has possessed the body of Luke Castellan and who has risen to obliterate Olympus.

The Last Olympian
Main article: The Last Olympian
The Last Olympian, the fifth in the series, was released on May 5, 2009.

Percy Jackson learns that Kronos' forces are preparing to attack Olympus. Poseidon, Percy's father, decides that it is time for Percy to learn what exactly the Great Prophecy means. Seeking a way to defeat Kronos, Nico di Angelo tells Percy his plan, though Percy doesn't like it. Percy bathes in the River Styx, making his body invulnerable except one small chosen part of his body (his Achilles' heel, in his case the small of his back). Kronos leads a siege of New York City and puts its mortal citizens to sleep. Percy leads the campers, Hunters, nature spirits, and centaurs to protect Mount Olympus from Kronos and his forces. While they protect Olympus, the gods battle the monster Typhon as he makes his way across the country to New York. Kronos, possessing Luke's body, forces his way into Olympus and battles Percy in Olympus' throne room. Typhon reaches New York but is defeated after the arrival of Poseidon's forces, led by Tyson.

Annabeth is able to help Luke overcome Kronos, and Percy gives Annabeth's knife (which is the cursed blade mentioned in the prophecy) to Luke. Luke, who has also bathed in the River Styx to host Kronos, stabs himself in his armpit, his "Achilles heel" to destroy Kronos and save Mount Olympus, dying heroically. The gods reward Percy and his friends and offer him immortality. Percy rejects the offer but instead requests for the gods to claim all their children and to have cabins for all the gods, including the minor ones. Rachel Elizabeth Dare becomes Apollo's next Oracle, breaking Hades' curse on the position, and recites the next Great Prophecy. The book finishes with Percy and Annabeth becoming a couple, and ominous clouds looming over Rachel's next Great Prophecy. The story is continued in sequel series The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo.

The Chalice of the Gods
Main article: The Chalice of the Gods
The Chalice of the Gods, the sixth installment in the series, was released on September 26, 2023. It was announced in October 2022 as a standalone novel taking place between the events of The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo.[10]

Percy Jackson is informed by his father Poseidon that, because he was never supposed to exist due to the pact after World War II about the Big Three having no more children, Percy is ineligible for New Rome University. However, Zeus has agreed to allow Percy to attend on the condition that he complete three new quests for the gods and get letters of recommendation from each god. Poseidon helps Percy to put an ad out for his services while assigning a nereid to be Percy's school guidance counselor as further assistance. Percy's girlfriend Annabeth Chase and his best friend Grover Underwood volunteer to help Percy complete the quests.

Zeus' cup-bearer Ganymede responds to the ad, needing help because his chalice of immortality has been stolen and Ganymede needs to recover it before the other gods find out. Percy and his friends investigate Hebe and Iris as potential suspects, and are forced to work around Percy's school schedule. Although both are cleared of any wrongdoing, in exchange for the three cleansing her magical staff, Iris uncovers the true culprit as Geras, the god of old age, and helps Percy, Annabeth and Grover to locate him. Percy challenges Geras to a wrestling match to the death, but ultimately wins by embracing Geras and in effect, old age and everything that comes with mortality, winning Geras' respect and the return of the chalice.

However, Percy, Annabeth and Grover get a distress call from Ganymede that Zeus is holding a sudden brunch for his mother Rhea, meaning that Ganymede needs the chalice back immediately. With the assistance of Grover, Annabeth's cap of invisibility, and Zeus' kitchen staff, Percy sneaks into Zeus's palace where he gets Ganymede alone with the unexpected help of Athena and returns the chalice to him just in time. Ganymede gives Percy a magical piece of paper on which Percy, his pregnant mother Sally, his stepfather Paul and Annabeth dictate his first recommendation letter. Poseidon reassures Percy that he's always watching over him and tells Percy that his small act of heroism in helping Ganymede proves Percy to be a true hero more than any of his world-saving quests did as Percy had kept his promise to the god and challenged Geras not to save the world or to get the letter in the end, but because it's who he is. Percy and Annabeth make plans for their future together and to get the rest of the letters that Percy will need to secure his entrance into college.

Wrath of the Triple Goddess
Main article: Wrath of the Triple Goddess
Wrath of the Triple Goddess, the seventh installment in the series, is scheduled to be released on September 24, 2024.[11]